@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c $Id: intro.texi,v 1.8 2005/05/19 21:55:14 biloti Exp $
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@cindex license of OOL
@cindex GNU General Public License
The Open Optimization Library (OOL) is a collection of routines for
constrained minimization problems, implemented following the GNU
Scientific Library (GSL) standards.  The routines have been either
translated into C or written from scratch in C, and present a modern
Applications Programming Interface (API) for C programmers, allowing
wrappers to be written for very high level languages.  The source code
is distributed under the GNU General Public License.

@menu
* Routines available in OOL::
* OOL is Free Software::
* Obtaining OOL::
* No Warranty::
* Reporting Bugs::
@end menu

@node Routines available in OOL
@section Routines available in OOL

The library aims to cover a wide range of methods in constrained
optimization. Initially, routines are available for minimization of
differentiable functions subject to simple bounds on their variables.

@noindent
The use of these routines is described in this manual.  Each chapter
provides detailed definitions of the functions, followed by example
programs and references to the articles on which the algorithms are
based.

@node OOL is Free Software
@section OOL is Free Software
@cindex free software, explanation of
The subroutines in Open Optimization Library are ``free software'';
this means that everyone is free to use them, and to redistribute them
in other free programs.  The library is not in the public domain; it
is copyrighted and there are conditions on its distribution.  These
conditions are designed to permit everything that a good cooperating
citizen would want to do.  What is not allowed is to try to prevent
others from further sharing any version of the software that they
might get from you.

Specifically, we want to make sure that you have the right to share
copies of programs that you are given which use the Open Optimization
Library, that you receive their source code or else can get it if you
want it, that you can change these programs or use pieces of them in
new free programs, and that you know you can do these things.

To make sure that everyone has such rights, we have to forbid you to
deprive anyone else of these rights.  For example, if you distribute
copies of any code which uses the Open Optimization Library, you must
give the recipients all the rights that you have received.  You must
make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code, both to
the library and the code which uses it.  And you must tell them their
rights. This means that the library should not be redistributed in
proprietary programs.

Also, for our own protection, we must make certain that everyone finds
out that there is no warranty for the Open Optimization Library.  If
these programs are modified by someone else and passed on, we want
their recipients to know that what they have is not what we
distributed, so that any problems introduced by others will not
reflect on our reputation.

The precise conditions for the distribution of software related to the
Open Optimization Library are found in the GNU General Public License
(@pxref{GNU General Public License}).  Further information about this
license is available from the GNU Project webpage @cite{Frequently
Asked Questions about the GNU GPL},

@itemize @asis
@item
@url{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl-faq.html}
@end itemize

@node Obtaining OOL
@section Obtaining OOL
@cindex obtaining OOL
@cindex downloading OOL
@cindex mailing list for OOL announcements
The source code for the library can be obtained in different ways, by
copying it from a friend or downloading it from the internet, at the
following address

@itemize @asis
@item
@url{http://ool.sourceforge.net/}
@end itemize
@noindent
The preferred platform for the library is a GNU system, which allows it
to take advantage of additional features in the GNU C compiler and GNU C
library. However, the library is fully portable and should compile on
most systems.
@c Precompiled versions of the library can be purchased from commercial
@c redistributors listed on the website.

@c Announcements of new releases, updates and other relevant events are
@c made on the @code{ool-announce} mailing list.  To subscribe to this
@c low-volume list, send an email of the following form,

@c @example
@c To: ool-announce-request@@sourceforge.org
@c Subject: subscribe
@c @end example
@c @noindent
@c You will receive a response asking to you to reply in order to confirm
@c your subscription.

@node  No Warranty
@section No Warranty
@cindex warranty (none)
The software described in this manual has no warranty, it is provided
``as is''.  It is your responsibility to validate the behavior of the
routines and their accuracy using the source code provided. Consult the
GNU General Public license for further details (@pxref{GNU General
Public License}).

@node  Reporting Bugs
@section Reporting Bugs
@cindex reporting bugs in OOL
@cindex bugs, how to report
@cindex bug-ool mailing list
@cindex mailing list, bug-gsl
A list of known bugs can be found in the @file{BUGS} file included in
the OOL distribution. Details of compilation problems can be found in
the @file{INSTALL} file.

If you find a bug which is not listed in these files please report it to
@email{biloti@@mat.ufpr.br}.

All bug reports should include:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The version number of OOL
@item
The version number of GSL
@item
The hardware and operating system
@item
The compiler used, including version number and compilation options
@item
A description of the bug behavior
@item
A short program which exercises the bug
@end itemize
@noindent
It is also useful if you can report whether the same problem occurs
when the library is compiled without optimization. Thank you.

